# Visualizing Music
### Evan Mitchell & Merissa Tan

#### Faculty Research Mentor
John David N. Dionisio (Electrical Engineering and Computer Science)

## Abstract

The traditional music notation system that we know today has been widely used by musicians across genres all over the world. But due to its gradual evolution, it is not a good visual representation of music. For example, accidentals (sharps and flats) in traditional notation change the pitch of a note without changing its position on the staff. This ambiguity makes it hard to visualize relative differences in pitch. Through our research, we identified other ways in which music can be better visualized and developed a system of visualization that implements these ideas so that musical patterns which are unclear in traditional notation can be easily recognized. We developed a web application that allows a user to upload music in the form of a MIDI file for visualization. A server-side Python script utilizes the `py_midicsv` library to convert the MIDI file to a usable JSON format. Client-side JavaScript then uses the `three.js` library to represent the musical notes as 3-D blocks in the browser. Each track in the music is represented by a different color, allowing users to examine each instrument parts individually. At the same time, these tracks are overlaid on top of each other, giving the users the opportunity to understand the work as a whole and easily identify common patterns in different parts. We hope that our visualization system will allow a casual viewer to easily identify patterns in the music, while more experienced musicians will be able to correlate these patterns to various musical elements, many of which are difficult to recognize in traditional notation. In addition, we hope that our visualization system will make music less intimidating for those unfamiliar with music by offering a new, insightful, and interesting way to look at music, thus making music more approachable.
